---
layout: post
title: COMELEAKS 2022
tags: [data breach, hijacked democracy, cyberattacks, elections, weaponized digital technology]
img: comeleaks2022.png
---

The COMELEC has once again been breached. The [Manila Bulletin reported](https://mb.com.ph/2022/01/10/comelec-servers-hacked-downloaded-data-may-include-information-that-could-affect-2022-elections/) and confirmed an ongoing hack of COMELEC servers. More than 60 Gigabytes of data have been downloaded, which include:
- voter information
- usernames and PINS of vote-counting machines
- network diagrams
- IP addresses
- list of all privileged users
- domain admin credentials
- list of all passwords and domain policies
- access to the ballot handling dashboard
- QR code captures of the bureau of canvassers with login and password
- list of overseas absentee voters
- location of all voting precincts with details of board of canvassers
- all configuration list of the database
- list of all user accounts of Comelec personnel

##### What does this mean for the voting public?
<!--more-->
1. **Voters are once again exposed to risk.**
Your personal information can be used to impersonate you or gain access to your accounts. This may also expose your family, friends, colleagues and acquaintances to risk.

2. **COMELEC has not taken the initiative to secure your vote.**
If access information and other relevant data can be acquired by unauthorized groups or individuals without even raising an alarm (60GB is a hefty amount of data!), this tells us that there are not enough security measure in place to prevent such attacks. It tells us that the COMELEC did not take the 2016 data breach seriously, and has not taken any significant steps to manage its vulnerabilities and regain public trust.

With Philippine elections historically fraud-ridden, whether it employs manual or automated election systems, the public must remain vigilant in protecting everyone's votes, and demand the COMELEC to fulfill its mandate in providing clean, fair, and safe elections.

Protecting our democracy must not be reactive. We need systems, policies, and infrastructure in place to ensure that technology benefits the people, instead of putting them at risk.
